Hi everyone.
So now we have already looked at two examples in which we use the recursion to bring the solution.
Now we are going to look at the third question in which we are not given a number, but we have to work
on an array.
Okay.
For example, we need to write a recursive function that checks whether a given array is sorted or not.
So you may think how do I apply recursion on an array, so the idea is very simple
Like we said, for a problem of size N, we can break it into one unit work we will
do and remaining N-1 units of work recursion will do and similar thing we can apply here as well.
So let's see how we can actually handle this problem.
So let us let me draw an array and let's say we have certain elements.
Let's say one, two, three, five, four and six.
.
Let’s say this is the array.
And I want to check if it is sorted or not
Now what you can do is.
The first step you can take and you can ask recursion to tell whether the remaining array is sorted
Or not
Okay.
So the first step would be you compare the first, the zeroth element with the first element that you
check.
If one is less than two and the remaining array is sorted, then you can say the entire array is going to be
sorted.
Okay.
So what is the condition for array of size N
Let's say you have an array of size N and you can check it is sorted if array[0] < array[1].
Okay.
And let's say there is a function F that returns whether this array is sorted or not.
So what we will need to do, we need to check if this is the case and.
The remaining array is also sorted okay so the remaining array of the size 	N-1
If it is also sorted then we can say yes, the entire array is going to be sorted okay
So what I’m going to tell if one is less than two and two, three, five, four, six.
This is the remaining array.
Is this array sorted?
Again, I will make a recursive call.
Okay.
So I am breaking down this code.
two is less than three.
Yes.
Then we will make a call on the remaining array.
i.e 3,5,4,6
Then we break it down.
Now for this, A[0] < A[1]
Yes, three is less than five.
And we can check.
That the remaining array that is five four six is sorted or not?
Now at this point we are going to check is five less than four the answer is no
Okay.
As soon as we get this as
No, we don't need to make any further calls and we can return calls from this particular point.
So this basically tells okay this condition is false.
It tells its parent that this condition is false.
So here we are doing and of true and false.
That means that output would be false, that we are doing and of true and false, the output would be
false.
And hence to the main call we will tell okay no this array is not sorted and we're going to return
This is the case for when.
The array is not sorted.
Now, let us also look at the case when the array is sorted.
What is going to happen?
Let's let me take a small example.
One, two, three, and let's say five.
So we are going to check one is less than two?
Yes.
Remaining array is sorted.
We don't know recursion will check.
It will say 2 < 3
Is the remaining array sorted.
We don't know.
recursion is going to check three is less than five and is the remaining array is sorted.
Remaining.
array  has only one element.
Yes, it's one element array is ordered.
This is true.
this is true
It return true.
This is true.
It returns true.
Hence this array is going to be sorted.
Now, from here you can figure out the base case.
So if.
If only one element is left.
Then you can say, yes, it is a sorted array
Okay.
In the recursive case, you have to check for two conditions.
One is, if A[0] < A[1]
And the remaining array is sorted.
Okay.
Remaining array, you can make a recursive call to check whether that array is sorted or not.
So that's all for this concept.
Now we will look into the code.
Hii, Now let's see the code for this problem, whether the array is sorted or not?
So there are multiple ways to write the code.
I'm going to discuss a few of the ways.
Okay.
So in the first function, I'm going to write a boolean function that tells whether array is sorted or not
I take input the array and I also take input the number of elements the array is currently containing.
Okay.
We talked about we will have a base case and we also talked about we will have a recursive case.
What happened in the base case?
We said if only one element is left or maybe 0 elements are there in the array, then it would be sorted
array.
So I can return true
What we have already discussed in the recursive case, we talked about we will check if arr[0]
Is less than arr[1]
And the remaining array is sorted is sorted the remaining array
Okay.
So now let's say this is the array
And the remaining array I want to start from this particular point.
I can pass this point as arr + 1 because it will take my array starting address for the remaining
problem to the next index so I can check if the array that starts from arr + 1 is sorted and this
array contains how many elements this contains  N-1 elements
Okay.
If this is the case, then I can say return true.
If one of these conditions is false, then I can say return false.
That's it.
That's the entire code.
Now we can try to run and check for this example.
Maybe I can say cout is sorted and I give the array and I give the value n.
Let's build the code and let's try to run it.
./ sorted array
And I'm getting a zero.
That means this array  is not sorted.
Maybe a let me make it as.
Six.
Seven.
Then.
I should get an answer.
One that, yes, this array is sorted
Now you can see that this code is working perfectly fine.
And this is exactly how we have discussed.
And the code should be implemented.
Okay.
So some people may find another way to implement it.
Let me also go through that way.
Some people may find this arr + 1 and N-1 consuming, confusing.
Then maybe is sorted and you may like to pass an index.
Okay.
Let me tell you one more way.
So in this way, you're not changing the value of N so what we are going to do, we are going to pass
the address in the form of an index.
Okay.
Let's say we're checking whether arr[i] < arr[I + 1]and we can say, okay, let's check
the remaining sub array that starts from I + 1 is sorted or not.
Okay.
And when I reaches this value, okay, we're going to make sub problems sub.
Problems sub problems sub problem when i is equal to N-1
That means we have array which contains exactly one element.
So let me write the same code in a different manner so I can check if  I = N-1
That means we are at the last index we can return.
True.
otherwise
We can check if.
Arr[i] < arr[i+1] and the remaining array is sorted is sorted maybe is sorted
to.
This is a second way.
Then we pass in the array.
Instead of changing the array address what we can do.
We can move the index pointer one step forward.
That is a plus one.
And instead of reducing the size of N we can say the array is from i + 1 till N-1.
So we keep it as N and we can check we can say return true.
Otherwise we can return false.
This could be another way of writing.
okay what is not declared.
Sorry this should be arr
This should be arr.
So maybe I can call this method is sorted2.
And here I need to pass in value of I initially it is going to be zero.
And if I run this code now, I get yes, it is sorted.
But suppose if I put it 16 here and I run this now you can see it is going to return zero.
So both the methods are almost same.
The only thing is in the first method we are not explicitly passing the address.
We are
Changing the base address of array in every call.
We are making a copy of the address and we are updating it.
Okay.
But in the second address, instead of changing the base address of the array, we have kept a variable i.
Which tells us in the current function call we are going to start our array from an index I and we are going
to do the work till N-1.
Okay, so that's all for the two approaches.
And I hope the codes are very simple and they should be clear to you now.
That's all for this lecture.
Thank you.